Improve VirtualDisplayEncoder for stable frame rate (#932)
smartdevicelink/sdl_evolution: proposals/NNNN-improve-VDE-for-stable-frame-rate.md

# Improve VirtualDisplayEncoder for stable frame rate

* Proposal: [SDL-NNNN](NNNN-improve-VDE-for-stable-frame-rate.md)
* Author: [Shinichi Watanabe](https://github.com/shiniwat)
* Status: **Awaiting review**
* Impacted Platforms: [Java Suite]

## Introduction

> This proposal improve the quality of video projection when using Android `VirtualDisplay` and `MediaEncoder`, as Android `MediaEncoder` does not produce consistent frame rate for rendering `VirtualDisplay's` surface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal improves the quality of video projection when using Android `VirtualDisplay` and `MediaEncoder`, as Android `MediaEncoder` does not produce a consistent frame rate for rendering `VirtualDisplay`'s surface.
```

Reviewer: Additionally, please make sure all changes to the introduction are also reflected in the PR description.  Thank you!

> [SDL-0274](0274-add-preferred-FPS.md) introduced `preferredFPS` parameter specified in `VideoStreamingCapability`. This proposal helps to implement the `preferredFPS` support in sdl_java_suite platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SDL-0274](0274-add-preferred-FPS.md) introduced `preferredFPS` parameter specified in `VideoStreamingCapability`. This proposal helps to implement the `preferredFPS` support in the sdl_java_suite platform.
```

## Motivation

A part of sdl_java_suite library utilizes `VirtualDisplay` and `MediaEncoder` to produce the video projection stream.
Actually, frame rate of video stream depends on how often `MediaCodec.Callback` gets called.
The component structure is illustrated as follows:

![virtualdisplay_unstable_rate](../assets/proposals/NNNN-improve-VDE-for-stable-frame-rate/vd_mc_unstable.png)

**Fig. 1: VirtualDisplay's surface produces unstable frame rate**

For instance, 

> - if an app's content in `VirtualDisplay` is updated quite often, the `MediaEncoder` associated with `VirtualDisplay's` surface produces 60 frames per second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if an app's content in `VirtualDisplay` is updated quite often, the `MediaEncoder` associated with `VirtualDisplay's` surface produces 60 frames per second.
```
```suggestion
- if an app's content in `VirtualDisplay` is updated quite often, the `MediaEncoder` associated with `VirtualDisplay`'s surface produces 60 frames per second.
```

- if an app's content in `VirtualDisplay` is not updated very frequently, its surface produces rather few frames (e.g. 20 frames) per second.

Most HUs would be designed for consistent video frame rate, so it may cause some negative effect if video frame rate goes up and down.

> This proposal addresses this Android specific issue as it tightly related with how Android `VirtualDisplay` works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal addresses this Android specific issue as it's closely related to how Android `VirtualDisplay` works.
```

## Proposed solution

> Because the issue comes from the fact where `VirtualDisplay's` surface emits output buffer in variable rate, the idea is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the issue comes from the fact where `VirtualDisplay`'s surface emits output buffer in a variable rate, the idea is:
```

- Give the intermediate surface to `VirtualDisplay`.

> - When `VirtualDisplay` sends frames, the intermediate surface can determine whether or not to forward them into `MediaCodec's` input surface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When `VirtualDisplay` sends frames, the intermediate surface can determine whether or not to forward them into `MediaCodec`'s input surface.
```

The approach is introduced at http://stackoverflow.com/questions/31527134/controlling-frame-rate-of-virtualdisplay, i.e.

- Create a `SurfaceTexture`, construct a Surface from it, and give it to `VirtualDisplay`.

> - When `SurfaceTexture` fires `onFrameAvailable` callback, we can buffer the frame, and render the texture onto `MediaCodec's` input surface by using GLES.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When `SurfaceTexture` fires `onFrameAvailable` callback, we can buffer the frame, and render the texture onto `MediaCodec`'s input surface by using GLES.
```

The idea is illustrated as follows:
  
![virtualdisplay_w_intermediate_surface](../assets/proposals/NNNN-improve-VDE-for-stable-frame-rate/vd_w_intermediate_surface.png)

**Fig. 2: VirtualDisplay with intermediate Surface**

### Detailed design

1. Setup intermediate surface and surface texture.

> We need to add following components, which includes some of [Grafika](https://github.com/google/grafika), into `VirtualDisplayEncoder` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to add the following components, which includes some of [Grafika](https://github.com/google/grafika), into `VirtualDisplayEncoder` class.
```

- `EglCore` (com.android.grafika.gles.EglCore)
- `OffscreenSurface` (com.android.grafika.gles.OffscreenSurface)
- `TextureId`, which can be created by `FullFrameRect.createTextureObject()`
- `SurfaceTexture` with above `TextureId`
- Surface with above `SurfaceTexture` (let's call this to IntermediateSurface)
- `WindowSurface` (com.android.grafika.gles.WindowSurface)

> 2. create `VirtualDisplay` with IntermediateSurface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create `VirtualDisplay` with IntermediateSurface
```

Instead of inputSurface, we use IntermediateSurface for `VirtualDisplay`, so that we can control update timing of the IntermediateSurface.

> 3. create capture thread

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create capture thread
```

> In capture thread, we periodically update surface texture, so that we can capture the surface in constant rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In capture thread, we periodically update surface texture, so that we can capture the surface in a constant rate.
```

The pseudo code of CaptureThread looks as follows:

```java
 import android.os.Looper;private final class CaptureThread extends Thread implements SurfaceTexture.OnFrameAvailableListener {

>     long frameInterval; // this is given as the paramter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    long frameInterval; // this is given as the parameter
```

                                    GLES20.glViewport(0, 0, width, height);
                                    fullFrameRect.drawFrame(textureId, matrix);
                                } catch(RuntimeException e) {
                                    ...
                                }
                                nextTime += frameIntervalInNano;
                            }
                            long delayTime = // adjust delaytime..
                            handler.sendMessageDelayed(handler.obtainMessage(MSG_TICK), delayTime);
                            break;
                        case MSG_UPDATE_SURFACE:
                            // update the surface here.
                            updateSurface();
                    }
                }
         }
    }

    private void updateSurface() {
        try {
            windowSurface.makeCurrent()
        } catch(RuntimeException e) {
            ...
        }
        surfacetexture.updateTexImage();
        surfaceTexture.getTransformMatrix(matrix);
    }

    /**
    * this is where we update the surface
    * @param surfaceTexture
    */
    public void onFrameAvailable(SurfaceTexture surfaceTexture) {

>         // here, we can do update surfaceTexture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // here, we can update surfaceTexture
```

        if (Build.VERSION.SDK_INT >= Build.VERSION_CODES.LOLLIPOP) {
            updateSurface();
        } else {
            // note that API level is lower than 21 (LOLLIPOP), setOnFrameAvailableListener(listener) is used,
            // and most likely, OnFrameAvailableListener gets called in main thread.
            // In that case, we have to call updateSurface in CaptureThread instead.
            handler.sendMessage(handler.obtainMessafge(MSG_UPDATE_SURFACE));
        }

>         // when the first time this gets called, start the loop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // the first time this gets called, start the loop
```

        // by mHandler.sendMessage()
        if (nextTime == 0) {
            nextTime = System.nanoTime();
            handler.sendMessage(handler.obtainMessage(MSG_TICK));
        }
    }
 }
```

## Potential downsides

No downside, as it will be implemented in Proxy, and there should be no performance overhead.
One thing to note is that this proposal includes the usage of `Grafika` component, which is under [Apache License 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

sdl_java_suite already uses some component under Apache License 2.0 (e.g. `JSON`), so adding another open source component won't cause any issues.

## Impact on existing code

> Because this approach does not change existing API, and changes are inside of `VirtualDisplayEncoder` class, there's no impact to developers who use `VirtualDisplayEncoder`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because this approach does not change an existing API, and changes are inside of `VirtualDisplayEncoder` class, there's no impact to developers who use `VirtualDisplayEncoder`.
```

## Alternatives considered

> This is pure improvement for existing `VistualDisplayEncoder`. So there're no alternatives, but this proposal adds the ability to specify the desired FPS on Proxy end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a pure improvement for existing `VistualDisplayEncoder`, so there are no alternatives, but this proposal adds the ability to specify the desired FPS on Proxy end.
```

> This proposal should be combined with "Add preferred FPS to VideoStreamingCapability" proposal, so that we can respect for preferred FPS value, which is specified by HU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal should be combined with "Add preferred FPS to VideoStreamingCapability" proposal, so that we can respect the preferred FPS value, which is specified by HU.
```

I think this line should be moved to the `Impact on Existing` code section of the proposal.
